Civic Chandran v State of Kerala
Vaishali. N
Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University, Chennai, India
Received 16 October 2022; Accepted 25 October 2022; Published 29 October 2022
__________________________________
INTRODUCTION
India’s #MeToo movement in 2018 shook the nation with the slur of sexual harassment
allegations made against some highly influential men, especially in the film industry. Soon,
many women from all spheres joined the movement, calling out their harassers by telling their
stories to the world. The #MeToo movement opened up a door for women to find their courage
and blow the whistle. M.J Akbar, who was then the junior external affairs minister, was among
the first, being a highly influential person, to resign from his post after having been found guilty
of sexually harassing a journalist1
. Victories like these sure have given many women the
confidence to come out and expose their abuser but it’s not always in their favour. Some existing
judicial vices mainly arising from the ingrained patriarchal mindset of those reigning over the
rulings prove as a hindrance while meting out justice to the sufferer. This paper will be dealing
with the recent case of Civic Chandran v State of Kerala2
that was filed earlier this year – in April
2022, and the Kozhikode session court’s controversial judgment that followed.
FACTS
There was a cultural camp and book exhibition conducted in “Kadal Veedu” at Nandi Beach on
08- 02-2020 at 5 p.m. The accused is a social activist and writer. The defacto complainant is a
young female writer who was invited to the exhibition. After the event, the complainant went
to rest near the seashore. The prosecution alleges that the accused had forcefully taken her to a
lonely place where he made the complainant lie on his lap. He then groped her and tried to
outrage her modesty. The victim had come forward to register the crime almost two and a half
years later, that is, on 29-07-2022 for alleged offences punishable under sections 354A (2)3
, 354,4
and 3415 of the Indian Penal Code. The accused had moved an application requesting pre-arrest
bail at the Kozhikode sessions court.
PETITIONER’S CONTENTIONS AND PLEA
The petitioner contended that the complainant had a personal vengeance against him. He has a
good reputation in society and this false allegation was made to tarnish his reputation. It was
pointed out that the defacto complainant had not given a sufficient explanation for the two-year
delay caused in filing the complaint. Further, the counsel added that the petitioner is a senior
citizen, aged 74 years, and had certain physical disabilities. On these contentions, the
petitioner’s counsel appealed for anticipatory bail.
COURT’S OBSERVATION AND DECISION
Taking the issue of delay in filing the complaint, the court observed that the prosecutor had not
established sufficient reason to justify the delay. The feeling of shame and fear was seen as a
vague argument to the court. Looking at the photographs of the event taken from social media,
it was seen that there were many people at the time when the alleged incident took place but no
one else had any issue with the accused. The court further said that it was a settled proposition
of law that when there is a delay in filing the FIR, a proper explanation should be provided. The
victim, being a well-educated woman should have known better than to file a complaint so late
and not support it with a strong explanation.
The court observed that there were amendments incorporated from sections 354A – 354E6
. This
requires now that someone to assault or outrage the modesty of a woman should have used
‘criminal force’ for the same. Considering the age of the accused, the court believed that it would
be impossible for a 74-year-old man with physical disabilities to forcefully make the
complainant lie in his lap and sexually press her breast. Moreover, looking at the pictures of the
women from the exhibition that day, the court remarked that the woman herself was wearing a
“sexually provocative” dress, and thus, supporting the arguments of the petitioner’s counsel the
court held that section 354A7 will not prima facie stand against the accused. Based on the abovementioned reasoning, the court thereby held in favour of the accused and allowed the bail
application.
ANALYSIS
This is not the first time a female victim has been pointed at for being at ‘fault’ for what she
suffered. In a country with an orthodox society that has a prominent patriarchal viewpoint,
imposing a fixed idea of an ‘Ideal Indian woman’ is something that’s been done for ages and an
ideal woman is seen as one that does not show her skin, drink or smoke or freely mingle with
men. These cultural perspectives become especially harmful when they make their way into
judicial pronouncements.
The odd reasoning of the court of the women’s dress being sexually provocative and that thereby
being the reason and cause for the consequence she has suffered, is a bitter example of ‘judicial
stereotyping’. Judicial stereotyping is the “practice of judges perpetuating harmful stereotypes
by ascribing specific attributes to a social group which ultimately acts as a barrier to justice”8
and it can be both casteist and sexist. For example, the session’s court in Bhanwari Devi’s case9
had said that it was “highly unbelievable” that the accused as a high caste man would have
touched the victim who is a woman belonging to a lower caste and in Mohammed Farooqi’s
case10 the court had given an unreasonable and blundered interpretation of consent by
remarking that a “feeble ‘no’ may mean ‘yes’”.
However, thankfully, the recent judgment given by the Kerala High Court11 has expunged this
particularly controversial remark of the session’s court by citing the case of Aparna Bhat v State
of Madhya Pradesh12, contending that dressing of a victim cannot be a legal ground to excuse
the accused from his charge. Nevertheless, the granting of bail was not set aside supporting the
reasonings of the sessions court because the complainant, being a “very educated lady” did not
provide a convincing explanation for the delay caused and the accused is a senior citizen. I feel
that the court might have just rushed up with its rationale on this point. Because would the
trauma of sexual harassment felt by an educated woman be less than that of an uneducated or
minor? Is an educated woman expected to feel less shame or fear or is expected to be more
courageous while reporting such a case just on the pretext of her being educated? Why does it
require her to give more “convincing” explanations to the court? ‘Shame and fear’ are in my
opinion, quite a sufficient reasoning to explain the delay caused. Recently the high court of
Kerala in XXXX v state of Kerala had remarked that “delay in filing a complaint in sexual
harassment case has to be viewed differently and should not be equated to the delay in reporting
other criminal cases”13. This view has been expounded many times, previously, in MeToo cases
because it was during that time that many sexual harassment cases with long delays started
piling up at the courts, and delay in filing could not be considered to dismiss all the cases.
CONCLUSION
The bizarre remarks on women’s dressing given by the session’s court had caused quite a stir
among the people when the judgment was given. No one decides what a woman should wear,
or judge a woman by the way she has dressed. The defence of a woman’s outfit being “sexually
provocative” can never be justified. This kind of argument only endorses the infamous theme
of “men will be men” and further contributes to normalizing toxic patriarchal attitudes in
society. Judiciary is the last resort of every citizen of the country and it must protect the welfare
of the people. It should be kept in mind that judges are placed in a position where words have
the power to impact the entire nation and contribute to the ideas of right and wrong in the minds
of the people. They are given a great responsibility of setting high standards of morality, ethics,
and values, which people look up to. Making such misogynistic and blatantly sexist remarks
only shakes the faith of people in the judiciary’s ability to provide impartial judgments. Thus,
the judiciary must develop a feminist approach while giving justice. The step taken by some
courts to conduct Gender- sensitization programs for its lawyers and judges is something that
should be encouraged and followed by more courts. Waves of feminist activism are being seen
in the current times and people are becoming increasingly aware of women’s rights in this
process. This awareness is playing a role of paramount importance in bridging the gap between
the genders and the judiciary needs to flow with this change and catalyse the process of
achieving gender equality in our society.
