Case Note on Enrica Lexi Case (Italy v India)
Abhishek Burman & Lakshmi Kumari
Background of the Case
Massimiliano Latorre & Ors. V. Union of India,
1 popularly known as Enrica lexie is an international case of 
murder of two Indian Fisherman who was on a fishing expedition in the contiguous zone of India, killed by 
two Italian marines who were on the oil tanker Enrica Lexie registered under Italy2
in February 2012.
Furthermore, Indian coast guards arrested the ship and marines belonging to Italy after the apprehension 
for the alleged murder, which occurred 20.5 nautical miles off the coast of Kerala,
3 and in response, an FIR 
(2 / 2012) was filed against the marines by the Kerala Police under “section 302, 307 of Indian Penal 
Code,1860”.
“The dispute on the Jurisdiction between Kerala High Court and Union of India arose on which the supreme 
court of India pointed out that, as the offence is committed in the Contiguous Zone of India, i.e. EEZ, which 
extend beyond 12 -24 nautical miles from the territorial sea so, only Supreme court of India having 
jurisdiction to try the case. If the offence of murder were committed in the Territorial water, i.e. within 12 
nautical miles from the coast, then Kerala High Court has exclusive jurisdiction to try the case”. Also, the 
Apex Court pointed out that the offence is committed by the foreign national and not the National, so only 
the Supreme court has jurisdiction to try the case.
The matter was handed over to the National Investigation Agency4
in April 2013, which firstly filed a 
complaint under the “Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime 
Navigation (SUA)”.
5 But further, Italy challenged that prosecution under the SUA Convention on the basis 
that it was not a terrorist attack rather than as per Italy, it was the of mistake, i.e. the marines believed that 
there seems a chance of pirate attack to them so that they have fired. India, in response to the same, has
asked the NIA to dismiss the SUA allegations against the marines on March 7, 2014.
Meanwhile, owing to an election in Italy in “2013, the marines were permitted to return to Italy to vote on 
the condition that if they were necessary for prosecution, the Italian government would send them back to 
India, which the Italian government later reversed”.
 3
rd Year Law Student, Maharashtra National Law University, Nagpur, Authored on 25 September, 2021. 
 3
rd Year Law Student, Chanakya National Law University, Patna, Authored on 25 September, 2021. 
1 Massimiliano Latorre & Ors. V. Union of India, WP©. No.4542 of 2012 (P).
2 Maritime MMSI No. 247232700 and IMO No. 9489297.
3 Annie Banerji, D. Jose, Murder trial of Italian marines in India navigates murky waters
https://www.reuters.com/article/india-italy-marinesidINDEE95900B20130610#:~:text=Murder%20trial%20of%20Italian%20marines%20in%20India%20navigates%20murky%20waters
.
4 RC-04/2013/NIA/DLI, as per GOI, MHA Oder No. 11011/19/2013-IS, IV dated01/04/2013, NIA took over the Investigation of FIR No. 
Crime No. 2/2012 of Coastal Police Station, Neendakara, Kollam District, and re- registered the case on 04/2013/NIA/DLI under 
section IPC – 302, 307, 427 read with 34 IPC and section 3 of Safety of Maritime Navigation and fixed platform on Continental Shelf 
Act 2002. 
5 Article 3, of Convention on Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation.
Published in Article section of www.manupatra.com
Dispute between India and Italy
India contended that it had jurisdiction over the case since the two fishermen were slain without warning 
barely 20.5 nautical miles from the Indian shore, making the region part of India’s Contiguous Zone.
6 As 
the matter is within the “Exclusive Economic Zone”, India has jurisdiction to trial it under section 4 of the 
Indian Penal Code.
7 Also, under Article 27 of UNCLOS, India has criminal jurisdiction because crime has 
been taken place in India’s coastal state, and the consequence of such can be extended to the state.
8
On the other hand, Italy claim that as the ship is registered in Italy, and the crime of murder is committed in 
the “Exclusive Economic Zone” and not within the territorial water so, India doesn’t have jurisdiction to try 
the case. Then Italy has the jurisdiction to try the case under section 87 (1)(a) and Article 290 of UNCLOS.
9
The Jurisdiction of the state regarding seas: 
The state has the authority to exert control over anything that occurs inside its borders. However, if the 
crime is done on the water rather than on land, there are several complications. For instance, if a crime is 
committed overseas but has an impact on the state, the state can exercise territorial jurisdiction. When 
crime committed is inside India’s territory, it is common for it to claim territorial jurisdiction under section 2 
of IPC,10 but in specific instances, it may also be utilised for extraterritorial jurisdiction, which has been 
recognised by international law as well as customary international law.
11
There are several conditions that must be met in order to use this principle of extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Firstly, if the citizen commits a crime in a foreign territory and secondly if there is the commission of a crime 
by a foreigner against nationals. On the second issue, the state has its interest in their people, and as per 
the passive personality principle12 of the state, i.e. state can claim the jurisdiction to prosecute foreign 
nationals for the crime committed to their people.
It was an “event of navigation involving a ship on the high seas,” according to Italy, which took place outside 
of India’s territorial limits. It referenced UNCLOS Article 97,13 which states that “in the case of a collision or 
any other incident of navigation involving a ship on the high seas, only the flag state of that ship can initiate 
criminal proceedings.” But the crime actually took place in the extraterritorial limit of India, i.e. under a 
contiguous zone. So, India has the jurisdiction to try the case. 
Dispute move to an international tribunal:
6
 § 5, The territorial waters, Continental shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Acts, 1976.
7 § 4, Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences, Indian Penal code, 1860.
8 Article 27 (1)(a) of UNCLOS, talks about the criminal jurisdiction of state in case of the consequence of crime in sea extends to the 
coastal state.
9 § 87 (1) (a) of UNCLOS provides that every county had the freedom of navigation without interference of sovereign bodies. also, the 
marines were on official employment of their home state trying to provide protection and security to the country’s interests especially 
in a very volatile and troubled part of the sea i.e. piracy activities and as per the convention of international laws are eligible to immunity.
10 C. RYNGAERT, ‘The Concept of Jurisdiction in International Law’, p. 1, at: 
https://unijuris.sites.uu.nl/wpcontent/uploads/sites/9/2014/12/The-Concept-of-Jurisdiction-in-InternationalLaw.pdf.
11 C. RYNGAERT, ‘The Concept of Jurisdiction in International Law’, op. cit., p. 2
12 G. R. WATSON, ‘The Passive Personality Principle’, Texas International Law Journal, 28, 1993.
13 Article 97, UNCLOS talks about the Penal jurisdiction in matters of collision or any other incident of navigation. 
Published in Article section of www.manupatra.com
“Italy filed a lawsuit against India on July 21, 2015, in front of an arbitral tribunal established in accordance 
with UNCLOS Annex VII. It filed a request with the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS) in 
Hamburg, an arbitral tribunal under the International Court of Justice, pursuant to UNCLOS Article 290, 
Paragraph 5, seeking “provisional measures” directing India not to take any judicial or administrative action 
against the marines and to allow them to leave Italy and stay there until the end of the Tribunal’s 
proceedings”.
14
In against Italy’s submission, India presented its case to ITLOS, arguing15 that “the tale provided by Italy is 
deceiving the case and the tribunal as well since it omits numerous essential facts that are at the heart of 
the problem and there was a significant distortion of the case.” There was also a delay in submitting the 
complaint to the ITLOS, but Italy claims that this is due to the fact that they are conducting a thorough 
investigation into the facts of the case. However, according to India, Italy has not done any serious inquiry 
into the facts. Therefore India alone has the exclusive authority to exercise criminal jurisdiction over the two 
murder suspects.”
“On August 24, 2015, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS) ordered both countries to 
stop all judicial actions16 in the issue and not to initiate any new procedures that may worsen the dispute or 
jeopardise the arbitral Tribunal’s operations. The Italian proposals were not deemed “suitable” because 
“The Tribunal may impose remedies differing in whole or in part from those sought,” it added. The Supreme 
Court of India halted all proceedings against the two Italian marines in response to the ITLOS judgement,
and the case was ultimately brought before The Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) in April of 2015.17
In May 2020, the Permanent Court of Arbitration in the case 18ruled that the marines would not be 
prosecuted in India and would instead face criminal charges in Italy because of the Diplomatic Immunity to 
the State officers of Italy under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and PCA in a tight 
3:2 vote gave its award.
19 The panel stated that India must cease to exercise its jurisdiction, citing Italy’s 
“promise expressed” to restart its criminal inquiry into the event”.
Further, the PCA stated that India is entitled to compensation which is determined by both states. 
20And 
after the negotiation between India and Italy, ten crores of Compensation were Given to India by Italy, in 
which four crores were given to the family members of each deceased and two crores to the Ferry owner.
Conclusion
To preserve the decision of the permanent court of arbitration in the Indian scenario, the Supreme Court of 
India has referred to Article 142, i.e. the court’s extraordinary Jurisdiction to terminate the case against the 
Italian marines, but this implies the court’s predisposition to settlement rather than dispute resolution, and 
14 The “Enrica Lexie” incident, (Italy v. India), Case No. 24, ITLOS order Dated 24 August 2015, p. 1.
15 The “Enrica Lexie” incident, (Italy v. India), case no. 24, order dated 24 August 2015, p.30.
16 The “Enrica Lexie” (Italy v. India), Provisional Measures, Order of 24th August, ITLOS Reports 2015, P. 182.
17 “Order Request for the prescription of provisional Measures”, Dated 29thApril 2016.PCA Case No. 2015-28, Para 12, (Italy in its 
notification and statement of claim, Para. 3, appointed professor Francesco Francioni as arbitrator pursuant to annex VII, Article 3, 
Subparagraph (b) to the convention of the notification).
18
 Republic of Italy. Union of India v. Ambassador, WP (civil) No. 135 of 2012.
19
“Enrica Lexie” Incident, PCA Case No. 2015-28, Page No. 4, P. 2.
20 “Enrica Lexie” Incident, PCA Case No. 2015-28, Page no. 6, P. 6(c).
Published in Article section of www.manupatra.com
in the name of protection, the court has neglected its own human values. There was a needless wait of 8 
years in disposing of this case which resulted in recourse to Article 14221 as a shield, causing the court to 
seem to break a basic norm in the Indian criminal justice system by paying the victim’s family money instead 
of punishing the offender. In this case, victim compensation goes against the spirit of the Indian criminal 
justice administration. The reason for this is that it resembles the custom of paying blood money to the 
victims’ heirs.
Only by giving monetary compensation for the loss of life, bodily harm, moral pain, and material damage 
to the property can the victims be satisfied. Victim compensation does not just encompass monetary 
compensation; it must be provided in accordance with the law and in a manner that gives the person’s 
family a sense of belonging after the victim. Because of this, the PCA’s compensation cannot be 
restored by restitution. Article 142 is invoked by Supreme Court, only to comply with the Award of PCA.
Compensation for a murder case, however, no matter how kind it looks, contradicts the notion of 
“complete justice” as defined by the constitution. i.e., we may argue that in this situation, fairness 
triumphs over justice by employing diplomatic rather than judicial measures to safeguard diplomatic ties, 
as is the long-standing practice of international law with respect to governments of nations before this 
there is lot many No. of cases in between 1991-2011 the Sri Lankan navy also had killed 85 fishers and 
injured 180 others22 and as per recent news of confiscation of Indian fishers and boats by Sri Lankan 
authorities between 2019 and 2020, 284 Indian fishermen and 53 boats were in the custody of the Sri
Lankan government and as per 2021 available data of government of India 62 Indian boats is in the 
custody of Sri Lanka23 as per the report after tragic incidence collision between the fishing vessel and 
Sri Lankan naval craft on January 18 2021. Also, there was the case with Pakistan, PMSA and Pakistan 
Army had also arrested the Indian fishermen’s24
. These all show a Human rights violation of the 
fishermen in territorial waters. 
In the Enrica Lexie case, the ensuing verdict by the International Arbitration tribunal was clear evidence 
of Italy’s diplomatic triumph, even if the PCA panel accepted most of India’s counterclaims. However, a 
settlement could only be reached through a negotiated agreement for a large sum of money. “Parties 
are encouraged to engage with each other with a view to achieving agreement on the amount of 
compensation,” the arbitral judgement states.
The panel might have decided on the amount of compensation, but both countries appeared to prefer 
the diplomatic route. It’s easy to see why the Italians felt compelled to make an offer the Indian 
21 Article 142, Constitution of India,1950. 
22 85 Fishermen were killed by Sri Lanka in 10 years Government, Times of India, Reported on 18th August 2012.
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/madurai/85-fishermen-killed-by-sri-lanka-in-10-years-govt/articleshow/15540452.cms. 
23 Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 1201 Of 2021. https://mea.gov.in/rajyasabha.htm?dtl/33508/QUESTION_NO1201_INDIAN_FISHERMEN_KILLED_BY_SRI_LANKAN_NAVY. 
24 12 fishermen were arrested, their boats were seized by Pakistan Authorities, Hindustan times, reported on 13th November, 2018. 
https://www.hindustantimes.com/world-news/12-indian-fishermen-arrested-their-boats-seized-by-pakistani-authorities/storyy9uDJeeYqPrdxR5I4SBHSI.html.
Published in Article section of www.manupatra.com
government couldn’t reject in order to reach a settlement. A deal like this was unavoidable in this 
situation due to the politicisation of the issue and the accompanying public opinion.
Nevertheless, Enrica Lexie may be seen as a win-win situation for both parties, i.e. India and Italy. But, still,
international law is always being doubted as true or not. As per Australian & Hobbsian theory of sovereignty 
explain international law as the law only after excluding the domestic law, but in the 21st century, the theory 
given by Austin and Hobbes seems not totally correct as the relations between states became complex and 
interdependent. So, the concept of sovereignty is now not an absolute concept; it is subjected to some 
exceptions, and that’s why international law can’t be questioned. But for enforcing international law, we 
can’t forego domestic law and the issue of Human Rights in vain. 
