Case Comment: State of Maharashtra v Vijay Mohan Jadhav & Ors
Niyati Trivedia
Symbiosis International University, Pune, India
Received 22 October 2022; Accepted 02 November 2022; Published 07 November 2022
__________________________________
FACTS OF THE CASE
On the evening of 22 August 2013, the victim, a photojournalist interning under Time Out
magazine went to the Shakti Mills compound with her colleague. They went there for a project
which involved capturing pictures of old dilapidated structures and articles in Mumbai. When
they reached Shakti Mills, they met two men who were the accused. They helped the victim and
her colleague enter the premises, where they did their photo shoot. The two accused called their
partners, one of them being a juvenile. They proceeded to tie the colleague and then dragged
the victim to an isolated room, where they tied her hands with a belt and ruthlessly raped her.
They advanced to take pictures of her and threatened her not to speak of the incident to anyone
or else they will circulate the photos.
LEGAL ISSUES
1. Whether the accused are guilty under Section 120B
, 375
, 376
, 376D
, 376E
2. Whether the circumstances of the case call for the death penalty due to the repeated
nature of the offence or the repeated convictions.
3. Whether the case in hand is the rarest of rare cases.
4. Whether the circumstances surrounding the alleged offence, in this case, are serious
enough to warrant the death penalty.
ARGUMENTS OF THE DEFENSE
Errors in framing the charge: According to the counsel for the respondents, the terms “sexual
assault” and “forcible sexual assault” are inaccurate and misleading and don't take the context
of the case into account. Moreover, they are not specific to sections 376D6 or 3767
. It has been
submitted by the Justice J. S. Verma committee8
that it is important to separate “rape” from
“sexual assault”. According to the respondents, several charges for the same offence under
Section 3769 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, are completely absurd and unjustified. (Referring
to issue 2).
Article 21 and its applicability: The counsel for the respondents has emphasized that upholding
the rule of law is essential in a criminal trial. Additionally, it is claimed that A.2110 is broadened
by the interpretive rule outlined in the Maneka Gandhi v Union of India11 as – “no person shall
be deprived of his life or his liberty except according to fair, just and reasonable procedure
established by valid law.”
The offence of criminal conspiracy: According to the counsel for the respondents, a crime of
conspiracy to violate substantive law is distinct from the actual violation of substantive law. The
counsel has cited the Supreme Court’s judgement in Ajay Agarwal v Union of India12, which
stated the following - “Conspiracy to commit a crime itself is punishable as a substantive offence
and every individual offence committed under the conspiracy is a separate and distinct offence to which
individual offenders are liable to punishment, independent of the Conspiracy.”
Non-revelation of the name of the survivor: Another major contention made by the
respondents was that Section 228A13 of the IPC, 1860 has been violated because the identity of
the victim has not been revealed throughout the case. According to them, it is a breach of the
due process and reasonable procedure rights granted by Article 2114 of the Indian Constitution
to frame a charge under Section 376E15 of the Penal Code 1860, after the trial (Sessions court).
ARGUMENTS OF THE PROSECUTION
No errors in the framing of the charge and no misinterpretation of the words: The learned
Special Prosecutor has argued that sexual assault implies rape and thus, it cannot be misled by
the accused. The reference to the errors in framing the charge is unwarranted and immaterial. It
is curable under Section 215(3)16 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
Nothing wrong with omitting the name of the survivor: They have further argued that the
omission to mention the name of the survivor is immaterial. A reasonable chance was given to
the defendant to question the witness. It cannot be claimed that the accused has been unfairly
treated as a result of the omission. In no way has the accused been misled. The omission to
mention the name and the irregularity did not taint the outcome of the trial or result in a
miscarriage of justice. The Special Prosecutor has relied on the following cases to show that
procedural law is the handmaid of justice;
 The State of Punjab v Shamlal Murari17
 Jamal Uddin Ahmad v Abu Saleh Najmuddin18
 Smt. Rani Kusum v Smt. Kanchandevi19
 Kailash v Nanhku20
 Sambhaji v Gangabai21
 Noor Mohammed v Jethanand22
 Jagatjit Industries Ltd. v The Intellectual Property Appellate Board23
The prosecutor further mentioned that it is not essential to discuss the judgments mentioned
above since we are obligated to abide by the statutes.
Repeating the nature of the offence: On August 22, 2013, due to their lack of remorse, the
accused committed the repeat offence that is punishable by section 376D24 of the Penal Code,
1860. (Another survivor had called and registered a complaint on 3 September 2013, saying that
she had been raped in the Shakti Mills complex on 31 July 2013)
Contentions relating to the procedure: The learned Special Prosecutor has contended that the
concerns related to procedural aspects are not worthy of consideration. Unless the legal context
mandates a different interpretation, there is no room to stray from the word’s natural and
common meaning. The courts should avoid applying a liberal interpretation of the law in a legal
procedure and instead follow the grammatical meaning of the terms used in the statute. The
same is to be applied in the current situation.
RATIO DECIDENDI AND OBITER DICTA
Repeated nature of the offence: In the circumstances mentioned above, Section 376E25, IPC,
1860 was added as an additional penalty for someone who has previously been found guilty of
a comparable offence (referring to issue 2).
Death penalty: The Court emphasised the significance of the principle of sentencing in Bachan
Singh v State of Punjab26 and further held that “special reasons” must be recorded while
imposing the death penalty. These “special reasons” are based on “exceptional reasons,” which are
based on the exceptionally serious circumstances of the specific case relating to the crime and
the criminal. The death sentence in Allaudin Miya v State of U.P27 was overturned and replaced
with a life sentence after the court took into account the rulings in the cases of Bachan Sing v
State of Punjab28 and Machhi Singh v State of Punjab29 as well as the violation of section
235(2)30 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973. Before imposing a death sentence, it was required
to weigh the aggravating and mitigating factors.
Mitigating factors: The statements made by the defendants in person and their mother’s
testimony has been recorded by the trial court, and they believe that they are sufficient to prove
the mitigating circumstances. The accused had claimed that they are suffering from poverty,
and a softer stance should be taken due to their young age. The High court said that these
conditions were considered mitigating factors.
Obiter dicta
 The court has observed that a rape victim experiences more than simply physical harm;
her mental health and stability in life are also impacted. The ultimate honour and dignity
of women are severely damaged by rape.
 The court has relied on Mohd. Mannan @ Abdul Mannan v State of Bihar31 to declare
that this is not the rarest of the rare cases.
 The court observed that the convicts deserve the punishment of rigorous imprisonment.
They further relied on the facts and concluded that there is no scope for “reformation” or
“rehabilitation”. The convicts deserve no leniency, empathy, or sympathy.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
The law commission attempted to expand the definition of rape under section 37532 of the IPC
in its 172nd report, dated March 25, 2000. Even though the law commission has made a serious
effort to have India’s current rape laws changed, the federal government has not kept up with
the situation. According to the NCRB’s33 “Crime in India 2021” report rape cases increased by
19.34% in 2021 compared to 2020. 4,28,278 offences against women were reported. The data also
reveals that overall offences against women increased by 13.2% in 2021 compared to the
previous year. The Substitution of Punishments of Death Act of 184134 eliminated the death
penalty in the United Kingdom for rape and other crimes. In contrast, in India, the death penalty
is the law when the victim passes away or is left in a vegetative state.
According to Coker v Georgia35, the death sentence for the rape of an adult woman violated the
Eighth Amendment of the United States Constitution because it constituted a grossly
unreasonable punishment. A few states still had laws that allowed the death sentence for
convicts of child rape. The court broadened this idea in Kennedy v Louisiana36 (2008), declaring
that the death sentence is unlawful in all situations where homicide or offences against the State
are not involved. The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court says that rapes and other
acts of sexual violence are to be included in “crimes against humanity” when committed
systematically and commonly.
CRITICAL ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION
In Indian society, women were once regarded as the epitomes of grace, courage, and devotion.
Their stature was no less than those of deities. But now, we’ve slumped to a level where women
cannot live fearlessly in their own country. Every action that they undertake has to be thought
through multitudes of times. The NCRB data is already despicable, however, the volume of
unrecorded cases is even higher. Change is inevitable and as a society, we are responsible to
steer in the right direction and build a mechanism wherein crimes against women are not
tolerated at all. Precedents should be set to warn people against such crimes.
In Mukesh and Anders. v State (NCT of Delhi)37, the court declared it to be the rarest of the
rare cases, and the convicts were given a death sentence. The law in India that only those cases
will lead to the death penalty where the victim does not survive or is left in a vegetative state is
not truly accurate. Despite that, the reputation, honour, and rest of the life of a woman are
affected. Some women, due to trauma from the incident, end up committing suicide. They end
up developing PTSD for majorly rest of their life
Every rape case recorded and reported in a country has some aspect that is erratic and different
from the others. In the present case at hand, the accused went to the extent of taking pictures of
the survivor to threaten her. It was also a mentioned fact that they made her watch a
pornographic video and forced her to imitate the things done in the said video. Such odd and
psychopathic elements make a case rare, and thus excusing the convicts from the death penalty
might not be necessary and justified.
